---
title: "AI Meets the Classroom: When Does ChatGPT Harm Learning?"
date: 2024-10-13 00:00
modified: 2026-05-06 00:00
category: reference/papers
summary: LLMs can help and also hinder learning outcomes
cover: /_media/ai-meets-the-classroom-when-does-ChatGPT-harm-learning-fig-1.png
tags:
  - LearningWithAI
  - LearningandTeaching
---

*My notes from the paper [AI Meets the Classroom: When Does ChatGPT Harm Learning?](https://arxiv.org/abs/2409.09047) by Matthias Lehmann, Philipp B. Cornelius, Fabian J. Sting.*

---

## Summary

This paper covers one observational and two experimental studies on the effects of LLM access on students learning to code.

Key findings:

1. Using LLMs as personal tutors by asking them for explanations improves topic understanding, though not overall learning outcomes (likely because it reduces the volume of topics covered).
2. Asking LLMs to generate solutions impairs understanding. The use of copy-and-paste encourages this behaviour, tripling solution requests without increasing explanation requests.
3. Students with stronger prior knowledge benefit more from LLM usage. Students with weaker foundations learned *less* with AI access.
4. LLM access increases students' perceived learning beyond their actual learning outcome, i.e. students think it's a lot more helpful than it is.

---

In the field study (Study 1), they compare students' work with a number of solutions generated by ChatGPT as a proxy for the use of LLMs. They call this [ChatGPT Similarity](../../permanent/chatgpt-similarity.md).

To calculate this, they generate 50 ChatGPT solutions and then take the maximum similarity with a student's code:

$$
\text{ChatGPT Similarity}_{iq} = \max \left( \text{sim}( \text{Code}_{iq}, \text{Code}^{LLM}_{jq} ) \mid j = 1, \dots, 50 \right)
$$

for student $i$ and question $q$, where $\text{Code}_{iq}$ is the final student code, $\text{Code}^{LLM}_{jq}$ is one of the 50 ChatGPT generated solutions, $j = 1, \dots, 50$, and $\text{sim}(\cdot, \cdot)$ is [Damerau Levenshtein](../../permanent/damerau-levenshtein.md) similarity.

The lab experiments (Studies 2 and 3) instead directly randomised LLM access, comparing treatment (with LLM) and control (without) conditions with pre- and post-tests.
